Introduction Background The data sets we have selected for analysis are both from the United States Center for Disease Control (CDC) and pertain to the area of chronic disease. Chronic diseases are conditions that persist over a year, necessitating ongoing medical attention or limiting daily activities. Investigating chronic diseases and their causes is of paramount importance due to their widespread prevalence and significant impact on individuals and healthcare systems. According to CDC estimates, 6 out of 10 adults in the United States suffer from a chronic disease, while 4 in 10 have two or more such conditions. Furthermore, the treatment of chronic diseases accounts for a staggering 90% of healthcare spending. Since many chronic diseases, such as certain chronic liver diseases or forms of cancer, are preventable (Willett et al.), effective communication regarding the consequences of lifestyle choices could potentially reduce the incidence and impact of these diseases. The first dataset under consideration is the Chronic Disease Indicators (CDI), while the second is the Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity dataset. The CDC offers the following description for the CDI dataset: CDC’s Division of Population Health provides a crosscutting set of 124 indi cators that were developed by consensus, enabling states, territories, and large metropolitan areas to uniformly define, collect, and report chronic disease data that are important to public health practice and available for states, territories, and large metropolitan areas. In addition to providing access to statespecific indicator data, the CDI web site serves as a gateway to additional information and data resources. The CDI dataset encompasses a wide array of statistics pertaining to chronic diseases, such as asthma and diabetes, as well as demographic information, including age, race, and geographical location. For instance, using this dataset, one could uncover that in Mississippi in 2017, the death rate due to chronic liver disease among females was 10 in 10,000. The dataset is extensive, containing approximately 1.2 million such statistics. For the Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity dataset, the CDC provides the following summary: This dataset includes data on adult’s diet, physical activity, and weight status from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. This data is used for NPAO’s Data, Trends, and Maps database, which provides national and state specific data on obesity, nutrition, physical activity, and breastfeeding. The intriguing aspect of the link between these two datasets lies in the potential for combining the information they contain to gain a deeper understanding of the complex 2 relationships between chronic diseases, lifestyle factors, and demographics. By analyzing and comparing the CDI and Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity datasets, researchers can identify patterns and correlations that may lead to the development of more effective prevention strategies and targeted public health initiatives. Both the CDI and the Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Obesity datasets are available under the Open Database License (ODbL). Processing The data was at times difficult to work with. This primarily manifested as differences in naming and style between similar fields in the two data sets. It was necessary to reverse the order of the points in the CDI dataset, which were not in the correct order. However, the NPAO dataset did not exhibit this issue. Additionally, the CDI dataset lacked a comma. This was resolved by using casting to reverse the point order in the CDI dataset, and inserting a comma via the REGEXP REPLACE function. Finally, the precision of the points was reduced to two decimal places. This last change made sense with more consideration into the actual content of the data: all points appear to be roughly geographic centers of states, and all data is either nation or statewide. Further, much of the language of the two reports differed. For example, one report used the language ”White, nonHispanic”, and the other used ”Nonhispanic White”. This required minor editing of names, to allow a single stratification table to be used. It was attempting to not impose any assumptions about these questions, however it was ultimately necessary to make some assumptions: Hawaians count as Pacific Islanders, not Asians, and that the categories White, Black and Asian are necessarily nonHispanic. The data has a small ’swisscheese’ problem: there were many null values which needed to be removed to improve performance. For example, entire columns in the Chronic Disease data set were blank (Stratification2, Stratification3). Additionally, roughly a quarter of the information in DataValue, the underlying statistics present in the Chronic Disease data, were null. All of these were culled in order to improve performance during loading. A check is performed, dropping any of the tobecreated tables if they exist, in order to unsure that no existing data are overwritten.\n